We are going to create three paragraphs. Each of these paragraphs will be treated as a separate document in the corpus

This is the first document or paragraph. Using a document frequency threshold and weighting can easily be performed on a DTM.
quanteda includes the functions docfreq, tf, and tfidf, for obtaining document frequency,
term frequency, and tf-idf respectively. Each function has numerous options for implementing the
SMART weighting scheme Manning et al. (2008). As a high-level wrapper to these, quanteda also
provides the dfm_weight function. In the example below, the word “senat[e]” has a higher weight
than the less informative term “among”, which both occur once in the first document.

This is the second document. For an overview of text analysis approaches we build on the classification proposed by Boumans and
Trilling (2016) in which three approaches are distinguished: counting and dictionary methods,
supervised machine learning, and unsupervised machine learning. They position these approaches,
in this order, on a dimension from most deductive to most inductive. Deductive, in this scenario,
refers to the use of an a priori defined coding scheme. In other words, the researchers know
beforehand what they are looking for, and only seek to automate this analysis. The relation to the
concept of deductive reasoning is that the researcher assumes that certain rules, or premises, are true
(e.g., a list of words that indicates positive sentiment) and thus can be applied to draw conclusions
about texts. Inductive, in contrast, means here that instead of using an a priori coding scheme, the
computer algorithm itself somehow extracts meaningful codes from texts. For example, by looking
for patterns in the co-occurrence of words and finding latent factors (e.g., topics, frames, authors)
that explain these patterns—at least mathematically. In terms of inductive reasoning, it can be said
that the algorithm creates broad generalizations based on specific observations.

This is the third document. In addition to these three categories, we also consider a statistics category, encompassing all
techniques for describing a text or corpus in numbers. Like unsupervised learning, these techniques
are inductive in the sense that no a priori coding scheme is used, but they do not use machine learning.
For the example code for each type of analysis, we use the Inaugural Addresses of US presidents
(N = 58) that is included in the quanteda package
